Readme.md, before:

# Jupyter/IPython display shim for Apache Zeppelin

## 1 Overview

Some visualisation libraries for Python can plot directly in Jupyter/IPython notebooks. These libraries rely e.g. on:

1. matplotlib
2. Jupyter/IPython display and communication system
3. ipywidgets

[Apache Zeppelin](http://zeppelin.apache.org/) version 0.7.0+ will support plotting matplotlib inline.
However, it is not compatible with option 2 and 3.

This project creates a shim in [Apache Zeppelin](http://zeppelin.apache.org/) that simulates option 2, but does not cover option 3.

As an example it uses Bokeh 0.12.4+ to visualise (`output_notebook`) or modify (`push_notebook`) plots inline in [Apache Zeppelin](http://zeppelin.apache.org/).

Tested with Python 2.7 (Ubuntu 16.10) and Python 3.5 (as of Anaconda3 4.2).


## 2 Installation

Clone the project

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bernhard-42/zeppelin-ipython-shim.git
```

Install the package 
```bash
cd /zeppelin-ipython-shim
pip install .
```

To compile the minified javascript library, install `uglifyjs`:

```bash
npm install uglify-js -g
```

and minify the javascript files

```bash
./build.sh
```



## 3 Usage

In Zeppelin Notebook

```python
from jupytershim import JupyterShim, resetJupyter

# To reset both the python JupyterShim singleton and the Javascript Jupyter object, uncomment the next line
# resetJupyter()  

j = JupyterShim(z.z, debug=False)
```



## 4 Supported Visualization libraries

### 4.1 Bokeh (http://bokeh.pydata.org)

Supported features

- Display graphics inline

  ```python
  output_notebook()
  ```

- Interactively modify visualizations 

  ```python
  push_notbook()
  ```

- Bokeh Javascript Widgets interacting with the plot

As an example import [examples/JupyterShim Overview](examples/JupyterShim Overview.json) into Zeppelin

For some of the Bokeh Gallery plots see [examples/JupyterShim Bokeh Gallery](examples/JupyterShim Bokeh Gallery.json)



## 5 Limitations:

- The shim only implements a one way communication from interpreter to notebook.
- currently tested with Bokeh 0.12.4 : all examples work with the following exceptions:
  - layout sizing_mode 'stretch_both' not working
  - mpl.toBokeh() not working
  - Bokeh server not covered
- *ipywidgets* don't work and might never work



## 6 Approach

### 6.1 Simulate the Jupyter/IPython display and communication system in Zeppelin. 

This involves 

- Creating a *Comm* and *CommManager* class in python for the interpreter and in javascript for the notebook
- Monkey Patching *IPython* (for displaying in Zeppelin) and *ipykernel* (for communicating via the new classes and the Zeppelin Angular Backend API)

  ```python
  from IPython.core.interactiveshell import InteractiveShell
  ip = InteractiveShell.instance()
  ip.display_pub = ZeppelinDisplayPublisher(self)

  import ipykernel.comm
  ipykernel.comm.Comm = ZeppelinComm
  ipykernel.comm.CommManager = ZeppelinCommManager
  ```
- Creating an Jupyter object in the browser necessary for the notebook communication part


### 6.2 Object hierarchy:

```
Interpreter (Python)                                        Notebook (Javascript)
--------------------                                        ---------------------
JupyterShim                                                 Jupyter
ZeppelinNotebookComm                                        Notebook
Kernel                                                      Kernel
CommManager                                                 CommManager
Comm                    <==>    Zeppelin Angular   <==>     Comm
                                  Backend API
```



## 7 Credits

As a shim for jupyter and ipython, the code in this project is based on the python modules

- [IPython](https://github.com/ipython/ipython): python display function (=> [license](https://github.com/ipython/ipython/blob/master/COPYING.rst))
- [Jupyter notebook](https://github.com/jupyter/notebook): javascript classes Comm and CommManager (=> [license](https://github.com/jupyter/notebook/blob/master/COPYING.md))
- [ipykernel](https://github.com/ipython/ipykernel): python classes Comm and CommManager (=> [license](https://github.com/ipython/ipykernel/blob/master/COPYING.md))



## 8 License

Copyright 2017 Bernhard Walter

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Commit message:

changed start sequence to adapt for timing issues

Readme.md, after:

# Jupyter/IPython display shim for Apache Zeppelin

## 1 Overview

Some visualisation libraries for Python can plot directly in Jupyter/IPython notebooks. These libraries rely e.g. on:

1. matplotlib
2. Jupyter/IPython display and communication system
3. ipywidgets

[Apache Zeppelin](http://zeppelin.apache.org/) version 0.7.0+ will support plotting matplotlib inline.
However, it is not compatible with option 2 and 3.

This project creates a shim in [Apache Zeppelin](http://zeppelin.apache.org/) that simulates option 2, but does not cover option 3.

As an example it uses Bokeh 0.12.4+ to visualise (`output_notebook`) or modify (`push_notebook`) plots inline in [Apache Zeppelin](http://zeppelin.apache.org/).

Tested with Python 2.7 (Ubuntu 16.10) and Python 3.5 (as of Anaconda3 4.2).


## 2 Installation

Clone the project

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bernhard-42/zeppelin-ipython-shim.git
```

Install the package 
```bash
cd /zeppelin-ipython-shim
pip install .
```

To compile the minified javascript library, install `uglifyjs`:

```bash
npm install uglify-js -g
```

and minify the javascript files

```bash
./build.sh
```



## 3 Usage

In Zeppelin Notebook

```python
from jupytershim import JupyterShim, resetJupyter

# To reset both the python JupyterShim singleton and the Javascript Jupyter object, uncomment the next line
# resetJupyter(z.z)  

j = JupyterShim(z.z, debug=False)
```

In the next Paragraph start the shim (note: this cannot be done in the paragraph above)

```bash
j.start()
```


## 4 Supported Visualization libraries

### 4.1 Bokeh (http://bokeh.pydata.org)

Supported features

- Display graphics inline

  ```python
  output_notebook()
  ```

- Interactively modify visualizations 

  ```python
  push_notbook()
  ```

- Bokeh Javascript Widgets interacting with the plot

As an example import [examples/JupyterShim Overview](examples/JupyterShim Overview.json) into Zeppelin

For some of the Bokeh Gallery plots see [examples/JupyterShim Bokeh Gallery](examples/JupyterShim Bokeh Gallery.json)



## 5 Limitations:

- The shim only implements a one way communication from interpreter to notebook.
- currently tested with Bokeh 0.12.4 : all examples work with the following exceptions:
  - layout sizing_mode 'stretch_both' not working
  - mpl.toBokeh() not working
  - Bokeh server not covered
- *ipywidgets* don't work and might never work



## 6 Approach

### 6.1 Simulate the Jupyter/IPython display and communication system in Zeppelin. 

This involves 

- Creating a *Comm* and *CommManager* class in python for the interpreter and in javascript for the notebook
- Monkey Patching *IPython* (for displaying in Zeppelin) and *ipykernel* (for communicating via the new classes and the Zeppelin Angular Backend API)

  ```python
  from IPython.core.interactiveshell import InteractiveShell
  ip = InteractiveShell.instance()
  ip.display_pub = ZeppelinDisplayPublisher(self)

  import ipykernel.comm
  ipykernel.comm.Comm = ZeppelinComm
  ipykernel.comm.CommManager = ZeppelinCommManager
  ```
- Creating an Jupyter object in the browser necessary for the notebook communication part


### 6.2 Object hierarchy:

```
Interpreter (Python)                                        Notebook (Javascript)
--------------------                                        ---------------------
JupyterShim                                                 Jupyter
ZeppelinNotebookComm                                        Notebook
Kernel                                                      Kernel
CommManager                                                 CommManager
Comm                    <==>    Zeppelin Angular   <==>     Comm
                                  Backend API
```



## 7 Credits

As a shim for jupyter and ipython, the code in this project is based on the python modules

- [IPython](https://github.com/ipython/ipython): python display function (=> [license](https://github.com/ipython/ipython/blob/master/COPYING.rst))
- [Jupyter notebook](https://github.com/jupyter/notebook): javascript classes Comm and CommManager (=> [license](https://github.com/jupyter/notebook/blob/master/COPYING.md))
- [ipykernel](https://github.com/ipython/ipykernel): python classes Comm and CommManager (=> [license](https://github.com/ipython/ipykernel/blob/master/COPYING.md))



## 8 License

Copyright 2017 Bernhard Walter

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
